Let's talk about native ES modules.
So, TypeScript supports native ES
modules and what we're gonna do here,
I'm gonna just make this narrower cuz
we're gonna need some stuff there.
So Let's pretend we want
all files in this project to
be treated as ES modules.
And before we go into exactly how that
would work, I wanna point out that
there are new file extensions that
are part of the way node handles modules.
I think this is standardized,
and if it's not,
it's on its way to being standardized.
You can have,
I actually have a web page for this,
which is easier to look at than code.
Right here, okay, so,
We have different kinds of file
extensions we can use, .njs, .cjs.
Has anyone ever used a .tsx file?
TypeScript JSX file?
Yep, so same convention applies here,
swap the j for a t.
You can have an empty s file or a TS file.
And these files are unambiguous.
An .mjs or a .mts file,
that is a native ES module for sure.
It's an ES module,
should be treated as such.
Files with the .cjs or .cts extension,
unambiguously, are CommonJS modules.
And you can actually mix these
together in a project and
TypeScript knows how to handle both.
They'll all sort of be compiled together
and you'll get a consistent result.
So if you have some CommonJS
code in your project,
you could just rename the files and
it's unambiguous.
Now, what happens with the .js files?
Well, you have a couple options, right?
You have two options.
You could start with the default, which
is they're not assumed to be ES modules.
And by the way,
when I talk about native ES modules,
it's not just about this syntax here,
there are features like top-level await,
which you kinda need to exist.
It can't be polyfilled very easily and
compiled down to some CJS equivalent.
So there are some features of native ES
modules that are not just about imports
and exports, but
what you're allowed to do in them.
And this is relatively unusual stuff.
I mean, it's new stuff.
But there are reasons why you might
want to say, all right, this is not just
using import and export modern syntax, but
treat this as the standardized module.
Now I can have top-level awaits.
I don't need to have a main async
function that I then invoke,
I can have top-level awaits and
top-level module scope.
So these are the unambiguous
file extensions, and
then we can make decisions about how
we want .js files to be treated.
And there is a top-level type
field in your package.json,
which you can use to state what should
be assumed about the .js files.
If you use module, that means .js files
should be assumed to be ES modules,
they should be run as ES modules.
If you have CommonJS that means that they
should be treated as CommonJS modules.
So you have those options.
So, let's make a little
change in our project.
We can take Banana and make it a CJS.
I'm not gonna update imports because I
want you to see me updating imports.
Wow, I hit Never,
that's a setting that's gonna haunt me,
I'll figure out where that is and undo it.
Okay, so now we've got bananaNamespace.
Let's call it bananaNamespace2.
We can import it from banana.cjs.
Let's look at our existing banana import.
Look, that has failed.
So when we're importing a CJS file,
we need to add an extension,
and it'll work perfectly fine.
This is gonna have.
Our Banana class, it's all there.
But this is a good thing to know about,
especially if you're writing Node.js code.
That's the more likely place
where you may see a lot of
existing CJS stuff because
it has technically been
possible to have Node run
modern JavaScript modules.
But until somewhat recent releases,
I think I had Node 13 written
down as the transition point.
You had to operate Node in --harmony
mode and you had to sort of opt
into a bunch of experimental behavior to
get it to work now it works natively.
And so you you might come across places
where you have to mix these things.
And this is a great thing
to help keep this straight.
And of course, it's also great to be able
to apply lint rules that are a little bit
different for
CJS stuff versus native ES module stuff,
you might have different
roles that you wanna enforce.
And a different file extension
makes that super, super easy.
Rohit had a great question here.
What does top-level await mean?
It means this.
I can't do this, cuz I'm not operating in
a sufficiently modern
module version right?
What it's saying is.
First of all, the target option needs to
be set to a particularly modern version of
JavaScript, ES2017.
I happen to know it's yelling at me,
or that error message is here.
It's not really an error in this piece of
code, but it's part of this error message.
Await in general is necessary,
or it landed in ES2017, right?
And then here, it's saying Top-level
'await' expressions are only allowed when
the 'module' option is set to 'es2022'.
That means I'm spitting out ES2022 modules
instead of CJS modules I'm emitting those.
And a corollary of this, or
a reason behind this is,
it's just not possible to port this
over to CJS in a reasonable way.
The workaround of course is
I'm sure, oops, I need async function.
You could always do this,
Something like that, or you could
even have an async immediately invoke
function expression, something like this.
But it's not really the same.
This will also work, but
again, in both of these cases,
we're absolutely not
having a top-level await.
Whether we have a named
function we're invoking,
or it's an IIFE, you're creating
a scope in which the await exists.
So top-level await, it's not something
that can compile down to CommonJS.
And that's why TypeScript's saying you can
only do this If you output a sufficiently
modern module format, not a language
level, but the kind of module.
So if we go back to
the TypeScript playground,
we can see what that looks like.
That would be like us going here,
module ES 2022, and there we go.
It's decided to drop the import entirely,
which is interesting.
I can't do this.
Yeah, it's not even letting
me do this in ES22.
So I'd have to do the namespace.
But in this scenario, sorry,
I'm getting my syntaxes confused.
In this scenario, you're not really
worried about CommonJS interrupt because
it's not just a choice about, I have
one piece of code that can be emitted
in a variety of different module formats.
When you use a top-level await, that
is something that only is supported in
certain module formats,
the most modern ones.
And one day we'll build this,
this will be our build target and
we'll run things this way.
But honestly,
there's not really a great reason to spit
out modules that are this modern, right?
It's a compiled target,
aside from top-level await,
which you'd have to think about,
is that something you really, really need?
You don't really get much
difference between a CGS
compiled target or these modern modules.
It's the code that is actually being run.
And remember, you're already compiling,
you're ripping out
the types from your code.
And so aside from those very small set of
features, there will certainly be more
in the future, but there's no advantage
to outputting super super modern stuff.